---
title: Merging Multiple Partitions
date: 2013-04-01T23:43:00.000Z
tags:
  - Ubuntu
  - Linux
  - NAS
  - quickie
path: /articles/mhddfs/
---

[Earlier](/articles/nas/) I talked about my awesome media/storage server named "stooge". I got 2 new 2TB SATA drives and wanted to merge them in a cool way without data-loss & reverse-usability and expense issues associated with other solutions like RAID & xfs.

---

My focus is storage capacity, not primarily data integrity, but I want it to be fairly secure, too. I want to be able to recover things on a per-drive basis, if I get any problems, so striping the 2 drives together is not an option. Basically, here is what I want: I want partitions that can stand-alone on their own, meaning that if I take a drive out of stooge, I want the filesystem to be readable and portable. I want one big mount that has media and incoming files (my largest file-collections,) split between the 2. 

## Joining Drives

 I started by looking into [unionfs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UnionFS), which lets you mount seperate partitions as if they are one.  The problem is that it's not balanced, so whichever partion is priority1 will just fill up. I thought maybe I could do some hackery around ctime at boot to move older files to priority2 drive, and priority1 drive does all the write operations in running-mode, but this seemed awfully hacky.  I then learned about [mhddfs](http://romanrm.ru/en/mhddfs) which allows something very similar to [unionfs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UnionFS) but balances on a file-structure level between multiple partitions. This is what I want.

## Volume mounts

My 2 volumes are ext4, so they have some journaling recovery options for data-security. Here are their `/etc/fstab` entries. The options `nodev,noexec,nobootwait` make them be storage-only (`nodev,noexec`) I set nobootwait, so it will boot unattended, and I can ssh, even if the drives are funky. Your partitions are probably different. I used UUIDs `sudo blkid` so it won't mismount the wrong partition, but you can also use the dev name.

    # /mnt/store1 on /dev/sda6
    UUID=ac0b74b9-36e4-4897-9e44-53e397310681 /mnt/store1     ext4    nodev,noexec,nobootwait 0       2
    # /mnt/store2 on /dev/sdb1
    UUID=43db0993-98bd-4cfe-8243-9ab4b12271fd /mnt/store2     ext4    nodev,noexec,nobootwait 0       2


If you haven't made the directories yet, let's do that & ensure the directory permissions are cool:

    sudo mkdir /mnt/store1 /mnt/store2 /share
    sudo chown nobody:nogroup /mnt/store1 /mnt/store2 /share
    sudo chmod 6775 /mnt/store1 /mnt/store2 /share

Empty out these dirs by moving files, if they have stuff before you mount. Now, mount them (or you can just reboot)

    sudo mount /mnt/store1
    sudo mount /mnt/store2

I double-checkled permissions of contained files/dirs, to ensure no probs, later:

    sudo chown -R nobody:nogroup /mnt/store?
    sudo chmod -R 775 /mnt/store?
    sudo find /mnt/store? -type f -exec chmod 6664 {} +
    sudo find /mnt/store? -type d -exec chmod 6775 {} +

## mhddfs

First, let's install the needed tools:

    sudo apt-get install mhddfs

Now, we can test it out (your partitions are probably different):

    sudo mhddfs /mnt/store1,/mnt/store2 /share -o allow_other,uid=65534,gid=65534

You should get something that looks like this:

    mhddfs: directory '/mnt/store1' added to list
    mhddfs: directory '/mnt/store2' added to list
    mhddfs: mount to: /share
    mhddfs: move size limit 4294967296 bytes

Sweet! 4TBs of semi-reliable data!

I used `uid=65534,gid=65534` to set mount perms to nobody:nogroup.

Ok, let's make it work on boot. Add this to fstab:

    # unioned /share
    mhddfs#/mnt/store1,/mnt/store2 /share fuse defaults,allow_other,uid=65534,gid=65534,mode=0775,nobootwait 0 0

